Smart-Helmet
ABSTRACT

Road accidents are becoming very common in the country. The impact of road accidents can lead to the loss of many lives and can also damage many body parts. This situation becomes more serious if the riders won't wear the helmet which can be prevented by wearing the helmet and can reduce these impacts. 
While riding the bike, the government made it a mandatory rule to wear the helmet. Using this rule as a base, a smart helmet system is proposed which helps in providing safety to the riders and prevents accidents. 
The system mainly consists of NODEMCU as a processor for processing the data, IOT modules for and sending a message to authorized mobile, a on the helmet screen, and The system will ensure a safe journey for riders and gives a helping hand in case of emergency. 
The cost of installing the whole system onto the helmet is affordable.  The smart helmet has a module to detect whether the rider is wearing the helmet and also analyses the breath of the rider to check for consumption of alcohol. The rider will not be able to start the vehicle if the rider is drunk and is not wearing the helmet. 
The current situation is to take measures for the bike handlers who would lose their lives due to alcohol consumption and for not wearing the helmet. In order to overcome the death rate of the people due to this, we can use “Smart helmet which has automatic Alcohol detection and Accident detecting technique in it”
Today in India and most other countries, accident is considered as an unexpected and unintended event. According to the survey road accidents lead to hospitalization, injuries and disabilities, considering these facts the safety of the riders has become a most crucial and important issue and concern in majority of the countries. 
The usage of two wheeler’s vehicles is increasing day by day for transport convenience we need to have proper Safety and efficient measures to handle accidents. MQ3 sensor is also embedded in the helmet to check whether the motorcyclist has consumed alcohol or not. 
The sensor data captured is stored in the cloud so that the accident information can be fetched anywhere and anytime at a faster rate. Considering the above facts, the prototype of smart helmet is designed and implemented to enhance the safety of the motorcyclist. This new idea will reduce the risk of motorcyclist life. The experimental results confined that the developed prototype model gives 84% accurate result of the accident detection and concerned persons will receive notification message.
